<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    
    <head>
        <title>Deviant Femme: Flesh Wounds from my Mirror Rituals
            (EXPERIMENTAL PERSONAL ETHNOGRAPHY BY EDEN MANN)
        </title>
        <link type="text/css" href="CSSAssignment2.css" rel="stylesheet"/>
    </head> 
    <body>
      <h1>DELIRIOUS BOYHOOD</h1>
        Having lived a delirious boyhood, I knew the material world ceased to contain the elements of my holistic sense of soul. I found “the supernatural bec[ame] one area where boundaries can be probed and stretched” (Tucker 187). In my time living in a living complex of the Fleet Logistics Support Squadron 54 on the outskirts of New Orleans, my reliance on the supernatural embodied a keystone of my interior queer experience; there was a period when I was eight years of age when I was driven by the destiny to write what I now consider my first novella — which centered on a demonic force by the name of “Bloody Mary” rising from the pits of Hell to wreak havoc on the Earth. In my writing, her motivations were vengeance and carnage, a lucid form of ostensive play without the strife of the mirror. 
        <h2> WRITING THE STORY</h2>
        Writing the story of the Hell-born Bloody Mary as a child seemed to be my first discourse with the Deviant Femme, which Thomas identifies as “the antithesis of the traits traditionally associated with femininity; for example, she is a murdering mother” (Thomas 82). My Mary did not first appear to me in a physical mirror, just the mirror of the page I was writing on. At this point in my life, gazing into a mirror required a stamina I could not yet afford. 
        As children, one of our only freedoms is approaching the regions beneath our egos through symbols and metaphors (Humphrey 2378). I was still undetermined to decipher whether this expression of my inner darkness was a purge or a prayer, but I knew it was an emulation of the shadow. In Jungian terms, the shadow exercises the ability to express feelings and conduct the actions the ego-centered self fails to (Tucker 194). In my version of the Bloody Mary story, I situated the apparition as the daughter of Satan — transcending from the image of the Christian Hell I was taught to fear in my Southern Baptist upbringing. My conjuring of Mary was the first manifestation of my inner shadow. Jung also claims that “the shadow has the same gender as the person to which it belongs” (Tucker 194). If the first instant of my womanhood was Hell-sent, then I knew there was a twisted snare the young child of me was hanging off of; the shadow could kill me if I allowed it to. Who was this disturbed woman maiming a young boy who loved to write horror stories? Who did she war against? 
        <h3> MIRROR</h3>
        When I was not writing I avoided my reflection in the mirror. The prose of Charles Perrault deems the mirror as an object that estranges the subject gazing into it, but a necessary symbol to clarifying our relationship with “femininity, humanity, and the self” (Schanoes 8-12). In passing the mirror was a portal to my animus, which trickled over into the external world — molding my body, my mind, and the expectation of such a composition. If I looked for too long the boy staring back at me would become frightening. But the boy staring back at me was real, and certainly not the animus as a child. When I look in the mirror at age nineteen, I see him faintly as the animus and not external reality. 
        Eventually, I spent less time with Bloody Mary through my writing project, and I was faced with the challenge of examining myself. I looked in my mirror more often and I began to wonder why the being I saw observed me but did not love me. I wondered why the shadow I breathed life into in my childhood writings stood in the corner of the bathroom, whose soul would make my eyes widen if I allowed a few minutes to pass. There is nothing in this world more challenging than looking in a mirror, and there is also nothing more disturbing for the supernatural realm than a child staring directly through it. The folklore of children gives space for “‘a time of testing the real and unreal, of finding one’s place between the realms of nature and society and between the natural and the supernatural’” (Farris 162). 
        <h4> THE DYSMORPHIC SELF</h4>
        There is no one “correct” way to approach the ritual of conjuring Bloody Mary in the mirror (Bronner 58). However, it can be established that each of these rituals is made possible by the “performance theory” approach outlined by Dundes, which enforces the notion that folklore is a practice and not a concept that can be attributed to the confines of text (Dundes 119). A variable that is shared from the thickly descriptive pool of Bloody Mary rituals is that it involves a girl seeing her reflection in the mirror before Mary appears. When it comes to reflecting on my past experiences with the terror of mirror rituals, the application of “performance theory” becomes all the more dire, for the external world did not know my entwinement with my inner Deviant Femme — who violently fought with the angel that was my anima. The animus (my boy body) as I gained fat, muscle, scars, and self-mutilations soon could not lend itself to a lifelong cultural performance. The personal folklore I had curated — my shadow rising from the pits of Hell to whisper my deadname when I was four and then coming back later to dissect my body in the mirror — was both the turmoil and the clarity that withheld me from ending my life in my adolescence. The shadow or the Deviant Femme or Bloody Mary or Satan’s daughter is nothing more than an apparition — an illusion, “The Dysmorphic Self.” The anima kissed my soul at conception and watched over me, warred against the Shadow, and allowed me to start living my life as a woman in my adult life. She was my woman, but for eighteen years she was overshadowed by her deviant contemporary. Once I left New Orleans, the shadow dissolved and I became desensitized to the disorientation of the mirror. This did not mean that the anima and the shadow were still not transfixed in an unconscious state of war. 
        <h5> INNOCENCE REDEMPTION SALVATION</h5>
        My early spiritual life (ages four to ten) divides itself into three distinct phases: (1) innocence, (2) redemption, and (3) salvation; without the Southern Gothic literary canon, my ability to categorize these shifts would not be plausible (Helmsing 317). During the innocence phase, the anima provided me with a direct path to God in my daily life. At this point in my spiritual journey, I was ignorant of the shadow beneath my consciousness. Once the redemption phase began, this initial concept of God “failed to integrate the diverse aspects of God/Self within [my] cosmologies and self-concepts” (Humphrey 2383)  Lucifer, according to the Christian dogma, is the personed form of God’s shadow (2383); when the Deviant Femme first whispered to me in Florida and inevitably possessed me during my mirror rituals in Louisiana, I took these instances as consequences of transgression — the punishment I endure for perceiving the body God conceived as de-realizing or as an external indication of my animus. The two forces during redemption (according to my Baptist conversion) were actively engaged in a state of spiritual warfare and violence. My baptism marked the beginning of the third phase, where I gave my absolute devotion to Jesus Christ — in which the horrifying clarities I reached in mirrors stored themselves in my body. Now it can be fairly instituted that the ritual of the evangelical baptism is a component of the folklore of the Deep South; once the believer is submerged with the Holy Spirit, the believer has conquered the shadow and Jesus becomes the universal animus for everyone transfixed in this belief system. Once this period in my spiritual life passed and I moved away from the South, my soul was still left to decay. The “Dysmorphic Self” ceased to appear in the mirror until I reached age seventeen. 
        The season in which my conditioned concept of God (primed during the redemption phase around ages six to nine) again began to dictate the nature of my spiritual servitude and practice. Bloody Mary appeared to me once more; my mirror rituals in this recent stage in my life transformed into a much more intricate process. Rather than simply gazing into the supernatural realm, I adorned the shrine below the mirror with a myriad of lit candle wicks and flowers (most commonly white roses, which I now understand to be a symbolic attempt to hold onto the scarcity of the innocence I had left). Before my relapse to Baptist beliefs at seventeen, the possessions of the Deviant Femme occurred at the climax of the mirror ritual — the moment where I felt revolted by the body that held my soul — and all of its fragilely healing scars, ailments, and flesh wounds. Kelly Link’s “Travels with the Snow Queen” emphasizes the philosophy that “‘[s]ometimes mirrors are maps, and sometimes maps are mirrors. Sometimes scars tell a story, and maybe someday [one] will tell this story to a lover’” (Schanoes 14). By seventeen the shadow that was the Deviant Femme pushed me into periods of extreme isolation out of an attempt to mimic the shadow, which I believed would help me properly understand it. As I was before I was still a child, just an older one. There are both marks of my battle with the shadow on and beneath my skin. Even if one mimics the shadow, one cannot become the shadow. One can only trust the ethereal guidance of the anima; this is especially the case for the American trans-femme. 
        <h6> SPIRITUAL VIOLENCE </h6>
        The shadow enables destructive acts of spiritual violence from the part of the body onto the soul. My main articulations thus far have surrounded the mark of the presence of the personal shadow. However, Jung also outlined the structure of the “collective shadow” in his psychoanalytic theory. This shadow tier considers how social groups and bloodlines incubate modes of living, believing, and coping on a widespread scale and/or across generations. It regards “the human species as a whole” (Humphrey 2379). If the shadow is not warred against on the individual level on the part of every member of a group/bloodline, then the collective shadow keeps its hold on everyone entwined within this social grouping. 
        Innocence is a state of spiritual primitivity. When I began to emulate self-abusing deviance outside of the mirror rituals, I prayed to the God that Pastor Eugene reinstilled back into my belief system. Evangelical Christianity upholds the illusion of tabula rasa; any instance of the shadow indicates Satan’s presence: the darkness does not come from God. Without my relationship with Mary, I would not come to appreciate the power of the anima — the feminine spirit guide I most closely associated with God in my current spiritual life. The “Dysmorphic Self” reflected the turmoils evaporated from evangelical salvation and conversion — as well as the American controlling images of what makes a woman a woman. Without the terror and the possession of Mary in my formative years, I would have thought it safe to begin living as a gendered “other” in a region where I very well could die trying. The shadow could love me but she could not save me; she could maim me but she could not kill me; she could terrify me but she could not paralyze me. 
        <h7>AMERICA?</h7>
        Living as an open trans-femme in the Trump era, I often find myself drawn to the system of innocence/redemption/salvation, yet Mary does not appear to me in the mirror ritual. Oftentimes it appears the fate of the American trans-femme in the coming years seems to signal back to the tragic endings of our community mothers. Since our bodies challenge the myth of the American dream, the men who perpetrate our deaths reason with additional myths about the spiritual state of the American trans-femme: we somehow represent something close to cancer to these men and their power; our deaths would be a convenience.
        The spiritual practices of my nineteenth year wane on the dissection of the apparitions committing violence against each other in the mirror. None of these spirits rose from Hell as I transcribed in my novella project during the redemption phase. Mirrors reflect how the anima, the trans-femme Self, and the shadow engage with one another; I argue that for the trans-femme the anima serves as a spiritual guide that transforms the soul once the trans-femme knows the shadow as thoroughly as possible — which fixates on the point just before the destruction of the trans-femme body. The shadow often reflects the intrapersonal consequences of the institutional (religious, political, cultural) establishment of an “appropriate” method of spiritual liberation. Mary has been more of a friend to me than America ever was. 
        The folklore of one’s life preserves itself through ritualized practice — not merely through its documentation in a physical text, (this was referenced briefly through the discussion of Dundes’s “performance theory"). In the case of this truth, I shall continue to engage in the mirror rituals — while simultaneously documenting how the ritual evolves. One of the most alleviating components of my ongoing spiritual practice resides in my devotion to the artistic process as a way of honoring the guidance of the anima and embodying the terror of the shadow whenever the time calls for a meditation of the darkness trans-femmes experience collectively. We are not our shadows, but our shadows have saved us. 

    </body>
</html>
